---
layout: post
title:  Étale cohomology
date:   2024-02-28
description: 
tags: KAIST
categories: KAIST

---

<p>
    This seminar is organized by Yong-Gyu Choi. Speakers are Prof. Wansu Kim's lab members.
</p>
<p>
    List of talks:
</p>
<ol>
    <li>
        <p>
            Introduction (Yong-Gyu Choi) 
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Introduce number theoretic applications of étale cohomology. Define sheaves for the local-homeomorphism topology on topological spaces. State equivalence of two sheaf categories. Recall the definition of injective objects and right derived functor (of left exact functor). Define sheaf cohomology of topological spaces. State the comparison theorem for sheaf cohomology and singular cohomology for locally contractible spaces.
        </p>
    </li>

    <li>
        <p>
            Étale morphisms (Yong-Gyu Choi)
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Give equivalent definitions of étale morphisms (excluding the structure theorem). Give examples. Explain infinitesimal criterion. Define geometric point and étale neighborhood. Define strictly henselian local ring and strict henselization. Prove topological invariance of étale schemes.
        </p>
    </li>

    <li>
        <p>
            Grothendieck topology and étale sheaves, étale cohomology of fields (Jeongwoo Park)
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Define sites and sheaves on a site (please do not introduce sieves). Give the site corresponding to a topological space. Define étale site (whose objects are étale schemes, not arbitrary schemes). Give examples of étale sheaves of sets/groups (representable presheaves including Gm and µn, constant, quasi-coherent). State that the etale site has enough points [Sta24, Tag 04K5]. Prove [Sta24, Tag 04HX]. Prove the Kummer exact sequence. State the Artin–Schreier sequence. Prove the equivalence between sheaves of sets/abelian groups on \(\operatorname{Spec}(k)\)et and \(\operatorname{Gal}(k^{\operatorname{sep}}/k)\)-sets/modules. Define sheaf cohomology of abelian sheaves on sites. Relate étale cohomology of \(\operatorname{Spec}(K)\) and Galois cohomology.
        </p>
    </li>

    ...
</ol>
<p>Reference:</p>
<ol>
    <li>Pierre Deligne, <i>La conjecture de Weil. I</i>, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1974), no. 43, 273–307. MR 340258</li>
    <li>Eberhard Freitag and Reinhardt Kiehl, <i>Étale cohomology and the Weil conjecture</i>, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas (3)], vol. 13, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988, Translated from the German by Betty S. Waterhouse and William C. Waterhouse, With an historical introduction by J. A. Dieudonné. MR 926276</li>
    <li>James S. Milne, <i>Étale cohomology</i>, Princeton Mathematical Series, No. 33, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1980. MR 559531</li>
    <li>James S. Milne, <i>Lectures on Étale cohomology</i>, https://www.jmilne.org/math/CourseNotes/LEC.pdf, March 22, 2013.</li>
    <li>The Stacks project authors, <i>The stacks project</i>, https://stacks.math.columbia.edu, 2024.</li>
</ol>
