---
layout: post
title:  Modular forms to Galois representations
date:   2024-08-30
description: 
tags: KAIST
categories: KAIST

---

<p>
    This seminar is organized by Yong-Gyu Choi. Speakers are Prof. Wansu Kim's lab members. Note: Each item below is usually discussed in more than one talk.
</p>
<p>
    List of talks:
</p>
<ol>
    <li>
        <p>
            Recollection on modular forms (Minju Park) 
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Introduce holomorphic modular forms (if time permits, Maass forms as well). Introduce the Hecke operators on modular forms, and explain some Atkin--Lehner theory.
        </p>
    </li>

    <li>
        <p>
            Modular forms to Galois representations in weight 2 (Yong-Gyu Choi)
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Explain the statement of 'modular forms to Galois representations'. Assume that the weight is \(2\). Explain that there exist something called 'modular curves' $Y_1(N)$ and $X_1(N)$ for $N\in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 5}$ (with its moduli description). Introduce its Jacobian and its behavior. Introduce a special case of the Eichler--Shimura isomorphism $S_2(\Gamma_1(N))\oplus \overline{S_2(\Gamma_1(N))} \simeq H^1_{\text{et}}(X_1(N) , \overline{\mathbb{Q}}_{\ell})\otimes_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_{\ell}} \mathbb{\C}$. Explain how the Hecke operators for modular forms come from morphisms between modular curves (and its variants). Introduce the Eichler--Shimura relation. Construct the desired Galois representation.
        </p>
    </li>

    <li>
        <p>
            Recollection on ´etale cohomology and algebraic geometry (Yong-Gyu Choi)
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Recall basics on étale cohomology including Leray spectral sequence, weak Lefschetz. Discuss \(\pi_1^{\text{et}}(U,u)\), \(\operatorname{Pic}^0\), \(\operatorname{Alb}\) and Néron models. Relate \(\ell\)-adic Tate modules with $H^1_{\text{et}}$. Introduce Weil sheaves.
        </p>
    </li>

    <li>
        <p>
            Sketch (and some details) of the proof of the full Weil conjecture (Jeongwoo Park)
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Follow Tony Feng’s notes with selected proofs in [KW01, Chapter 1]. State [Del80, Théorème 1].
        </p>
    </li>

    <li>
        <p>
            Modular curves and modular forms, and proof of 'modular to Galois' (Juan Daniel, Jeongwoo Park and Yong-Gyu Choi)
        </p>
        <p>
            Abstract: Define elliptic curves over schemes. Define \(\Gamma_1(N)\)-level structure for them. Describe generalized elliptic curves over algebraically closed fields. Define modular curves \(Y_1(N)\) and \(X_1(N)\) for \(N\in \mathbb{Z}_{\geq 5}\) as schemes over \(\operatorname{Spec}(\mathbb{Z}[1/N])\), and the universal elliptic curve. Prove the Eichler--Shimura isomorphism \(S_k(\Gamma_1(N))\oplus \overline{S_k(\Gamma_1(N))} \simeq \tilde{H}^1_{\text{et}}(Y_1(N) , \operatorname{Sym}^k R^1 f_*\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_{\ell})\otimes_{\overline{\mathbb{Q}}_{\ell}} \mathbb{\C}\). Introduce \(Y_1(N,p)\) and \(X_1(N,p)\). Define the Hecke operators \(T_p\) and \(\langle n \rangle\) geometrically, and recall the Hecke algebra. Prove the Eichler--Shimura relation \(T_p = F+\langle p\rangle V \), \(FV=VF = p^{k+1}\). Introduce the Kuga--Sato varieties in order to reduce to the case of constant sheaves. Construct the desired Galois representation and prove its properties.
        </p>
    </li>
</ol>
<p>Reference:</p>
<ol>
    <li>Pierre Deligne, <i>La conjecture de Weil. I</i>, Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1974), no. 43, 273–307. MR 340258</li>
    <li>Eberhard Freitag and Reinhardt Kiehl, <i>Étale cohomology and the Weil conjecture</i>, Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3) [Results in Mathematics and Related Areas (3)], vol. 13, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1988, Translated from the German by Betty S. Waterhouse and William C. Waterhouse, With an historical introduction by J. A. Dieudonné. MR 926276</li>
    <li>James S. Milne, <i>Étale cohomology</i>, Princeton Mathematical Series, No. 33, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1980. MR 559531</li>
    <li>James S. Milne, <i>Lectures on Étale cohomology</i>, https://www.jmilne.org/math/CourseNotes/LEC.pdf, March 22, 2013.</li>
    <li>The Stacks project authors, <i>The stacks project</i>, https://stacks.math.columbia.edu, 2024.</li>
</ol>
